Course Overview
Course Overview
Hi everyone. My name is Jason Alba and welcome to my course, Creating and Leading Effective Teams. I am CEO and founder at JibberJobber.com and a soft skills author at Pluralsight. In this course, we're going to talk about strategies and tactics you can work on right now to become a better team leader. Some of the major topics we'll cover include creating a great team, building the right culture for your team, team communication, and team dynamics. By the end of this course, you should feel confident in your ability to lead your team to success. You'll have plenty of ideas to implement from the time you start to lead your team until the team is dismantled. From here, you should feel comfortable diving into leading your team with courses on leadership, change management, and emotional intelligence. I hope you'll join me on this journey to learn about team leadership and culture, with the Creating and Leading Effective Teams course at Pluralsight.

Roles and Responsibilities of a Team Leader
Introduction
I created this course to help people who either currently lead a team or are getting ready to be a team leader. My objective is to help you lead teams more effectively and see various kinds of success because you are taking the steps to become a great team leader. Throughout my career, I've worked with team leaders who have understood or adhered to a mission, but haven't had training on creating, managing, or leading teams. Too often they were thrown into a situation where they were expected to do things, but those things were loosely defined. Sometimes the new team leader had no experience or even ambition to be a team leader. In this course, we'll talk about how you can prepare for the team leader role, creating and leading a high functioning and productive team while maintaining a sense of control and making the best of your leadership opportunity. By the end of this course, you should feel confident that you have the ideas, strategies, and tactics to help you lead teams better. These ideas will help you do things like run better meetings, inspire individuals, and create the right environment to keep your team from being distracted by corporate politics and frequent changes to specifications. In this module, we talk about the dynamics of a team, pay special attention to the roles, responsibilities, and expectations of a team leader and make note of which of these apply to you right now. In the next module, we talk about starting a team. What are things you can do to start the team right so you aren't spending time later fixing mistakes or always being in reactive mode? Then, we talk about specific tactics you can implement to create a highly productive and high functioning team. Let's get started.

Buying into Your Leadership Role
I think I've always been excited to be a leader. I think I've had good ideas, good people skills, and could manage and motivate a group to success. In my earlier leadership roles, though, the excitement tended to wear off when difficult situations came up or when I would have to make difficult decisions that could impact individuals or the success of the team. Imposter syndrome would sink in and I'd question if I was the right person for the job. Self‑doubt and imposter syndrome are real issues that many leaders face. I have lived through it, I've coached leaders through it, and I've watched from the sidelines as leaders have tried to work through their own self‑doubt. I have a few thoughts to share with you for when these thoughts and feelings creep in. In my most impactful imposter syndrome experience, I had to remind myself that I had gone through the interview process and I beat out the other candidates. I also had to remember that while I might not have been the perfect candidate, I was the one the decision makers chose. They knew I'd have to go through a learning curve. Good managers recognize most people aren't performing at 100% right away and allow that learning curve process to happen. Depending on the role, I have told some of my recent hires that I expect them to take a good three or 12 months to work through the learning curve. I also tell them they will likely experience imposter syndrome and then talk about why I hired them and to let those feelings of self‑doubt go their way and not dwell on them. Are you ready to be the team leader? Maybe, maybe not. Maybe you still have things to learn and improve upon. But let me tell you, every leader out there has had things they need to work on. Everyone can improve, learn, and practice. Don't let your insecurities convince you that you aren't the right person for the job. As long as you're willing to learn, try, and improve, you should be okay. When you think you know it all and there's not room for improvement or you just don't care to try anymore, that's when it might be time to give someone else the opportunity. Leading others can be challenging. It can feel uncomfortable and stretch you in ways you didn't think you are ready to be stretched. Your ego and weakness can be on display. It can also be a wonderful opportunity to impact people and help them realize some of their own greatness. You can have a huge impact on their futures, on your organization, customers, and maybe even the industry. If you're nervous, that's okay. If you have self doubts, that's okay. Give yourself the room and flexibility to work through the learning curve and imposter syndrome. You might not have the exact qualifications to be the best team leader now, but being willing to learn and grow might be more important. Make sure you figure out how much of this to communicate with your boss. Too much might make you sound whiny and insecure, too little and you might deprive them of providing the help and guidance they should provide as your boss.

Working on a Team
Working on a team can be complex, especially if you're the team leader. You could take semesters of college classes that talk about team dynamics, organizational behavior, motivating others, etc. People have spent decades studying every aspect of leadership, much more than what we can talk about in this short course. In Pluralsight, there are some great courses that complement this course to help you become a better team leader. As with every course or topic you like, be sure to click on the related courses link. The first course I'll mention is Working on a Team. That course is for every team member. The first module is on team dynamics, including why teams are formed, the vision and goals of a team, communicating the vision and the goals. We talk about authority and power, decision making, how to handle disputes, and navigating through politics. In the second module, we talk about how to be a better team contributor, team member goals, and specific tactics to help you be a better team member. In the last module, we talk about working with difficult people. I included this module at the request of a software developer who said, "I need to understand how to work with people that I don't like." In this module, we talked about actions and reactions. We talked about assumptions and again, communication. We talked about personalities and many different types of difficult people. Speaking of personalities, my course titled, Working and Communicating with Different Personalities is in my opinion, required for team leaders. There's no way you'll have a team where everyone has the same personality or understands other personalities on the team. Mixing personalities can feel really confusing unless you understand what the personalities mean and how they drive behavior. I have to recommend my course titled, Becoming a Better Listener. Before I did that course. I hadn't really thought about active listening or the role of listening in team relationships. Team leaders who excel in their listening skills can have a real advantage over leaders whose teams don't feel they are heard. There are a lot of courses relevant to team leaders, from prioritizing tasks to time management, project management and product management, emotional intelligence and communication skills. Dig through the Pluralsight library to make a list of your own or check out the channel for team leaders I created, which you'll find in the exercise files section of this course.

Responsibilities of a Team Leader
Every team member has responsibilities. I don't mean to overwhelm you, but as a team leader you have additional and special responsibilities. When you assume the role of team leader, some of these responsibilities and expectations should be explicitly stated. When you assume the role of team leader, some of these responsibilities should be explicitly stated. I've learned the more ambiguous a role is, the harder it is for teams and leaders to focus on what they really should focus on. Make sure your responsibilities are explicitly stated. I can't tell you exactly what those responsibilities will be, because every team will be different and organizational or circumstantial situations can be quite varied. Approach this part of your role as team leader with a principle‑based approach and you should be able to adjust to your responsibilities easily, even as they change. When I say principle‑based, here are some foundational principle‑driven questions you should be able to answer. What is the purpose of the team? What is the desired outcome of the team? How and when should the team be disbanded, or what does ending the team look like? What are some of the needs of my team members? How can I best help my team succeed? What are some issues I can foresee that I'll need to resolve? What are the strengths of each person on my team and how can I best utilize each person? What are characteristics of the culture I want this team to have? You should ask your boss or the stakeholders what they expect from you as a team leader. They'll likely tell you they want to achieve a certain outcome. It's important to hear this from them. I would even document what they say your responsibilities are and perhaps share your documentation in an email with them. In addition to what you learn in those conversations, I encourage you to have a conversation about your role and responsibilities with each individual on your team. Some teams are so short‑lived they might not seem significant in your career, but to people on your team, the opportunity might be career changing. Here's a list of specific responsibilities you might have as a team leader; the final outcome of the project. There are many factors that determine your team's success, but ultimately the team leader is responsible for this. Acquiring or lobbying for the right resources. Allocation of those resources. Developing the right relationships. Having the right conversations to move your projects in the right direction and managing change and helping your team and stakeholders through change. Be careful to understand what you are responsible for and what you are not responsible for. For example, while you might want all of your team members to be happy and excited, you aren't always able to control how they feel. You aren't responsible for industry shifts or market surprises, although sometimes it will be your job to be aware of outside influences that could impact your decisions. Focus on what you can, what Stephen Covey calls your circle of influence, while you're hyper aware of any information that will help you have a successful team or project.

Expectations of a Team Leader
The responsibilities I listed in the responsibilities video are different than expectations. In that responsibilities should be clearly defined and agreed to, whereas expectations might be simply assumed. Fulfilling your responsibilities is of utmost importance and could impact future opportunities and performance reviews. Understanding and working on some expectations others have can be just as important and can impact how others judge your team leadership skills. When I was gathering information to put together a list of team leader expectations, I found so many different things that my list felt overwhelming. Instead of showing you a huge list of random expectations, I decided to group them into five groups. Feel free to create your own groups based on your own unique circumstances. Also, note that some of these expectations will be from your managers while others will be expectations from your team. The first set of expectations are grouped under project management. I'm not saying you are the project manager. Sometimes you'll have a project manager on your team but ultimately you're responsible for project management. In order to do this well, you might create or enforce systems to hold people accountable for their deliverables. Your team will expect that scheduling, task assignments, and resource allocation will be addressed so they can do their jobs and meet their expectations. Even if you have a project manager, you'll be expected to monitor the progress of the project in depth. Going to a meeting where you're asked about your team's progress can be embarrassing if you don't know details about the status. I grouped the next set of expectations under empowerment. You can empower your team in different ways. Perhaps you empower them when you inspire them. I know when I'm inspired, I feel empowered and when I'm empowered, I feel inspired. You can also empower through ensuring they have the education and training, as well as the right resources and tools to get their jobs done. You can empower by letting them make decisions without your approval. When team members know they have autonomy to make decisions with your support, they'll be more mindful about strategic direction and the impact their decisions might have. Another way to empower your team is to be accessible and approachable. Perhaps you demonstrate this through regular mentoring or coaching sessions. The next set of expectations is grouped under culture. As the team leader, you are responsible for developing and protecting a healthy culture. Your culture might be influenced by the team size, personalities, and what the team's objective is. Expectations that fall under culture include what, how, and when you communicate, whether to others on your team or to people outside of your team. The culture you create will be influenced by how you listen to others. Team leaders should expect to do a lot of listening. You should build a culture of trust, which means trust from you to your team and from your team back to you. In my teams, people know failure is okay. I'm not talking about failure resulting from not trying hard enough or being lazy or not caring. I'm talking about creating a culture where people know that if they try really hard and still fail, that's okay. Especially if we learn from our failure and are able to move on. Praising, rewarding, and encouraging your team members might be other important cultural expectations. The next group of expectations is related to information management. If bad intelligence comes into the group in the wrong way, you might find yourself spending time reacting to rumors and gossip or doing damage control. I think the most important point related to information expectations is for you to be honest with your team, your team will appreciate your honesty and openness, which can build trust. At the same time, you have to use discretion on what you can't or shouldn't share. Sounds contradictory, but every good manager has to figure out where that line is and respect that line. Your management will have expectations of information sharing also. This might be reporting back on KPIs and OKRs or other goals or metrics that your organization measures. I tell people who work for me that I have high expectations of regular and good communication. I like it when they come to me with reports and updates instead of feeling like I'm always chasing them down. The last group I'll talk about is leadership. If you are my team leader, I would expect you to reinforce the teams and maybe the organization's vision and mission. I expect you to maintain the team's focus and as best you can, be aware of everything that goes on in your team. You should know how your team is interacting with one another and figure out what changes or training they need. I expect my team leaders to seek input from others and when appropriate implement their input. I also expect you will make hard decisions, which is a sign of a good leader. These expectations can shift. Sometimes the urgency of some expectation will feel more important than others. Be sure the expectations you are most intent on meeting are those that are aligned with your responsibilities. You can't make everyone happy and sometimes you'll have expectations that you shouldn't have. As the team leader, you need to be able to sift through the expectations to determine which are reasonable and good expectations and which you should ignore.

You Aren’t a Participant Anymore
The first time I had led a team of developers, I had put the team together. I thought the dynamics of that team were normal. But having been the boss, going through the hiring process with each team member, having a big title and tenure at my company meant I was afforded some advantages I would not enjoy on subsequent teams. Fast forward a few years and I was in a different organization. Our team was pieced together from an organizational merger. Because of my previous role, I was again leading a team of developers, but this time was different. The developers from the other organization, the one we had merged with, had time and history with one another. They also had a different level of training and experience and their last manager was drastically different than I was. That was all fine. My devs and their devs quickly came together and functioned as an awesome team. But, I was in for a bit of a surprise. I quickly came to realize I wasn't a regular team member anymore. I was the boss. I was a good boss. That's the consistent feedback I heard. My team liked me and my management style, they respected me. They worked very well together. I enjoyed this team a lot. While I enjoyed knowing they were a tight team, going to lunch together and spending evenings playing board games, I came to realize I wasn't doing that with them. I wasn't invited to lunch. I didn't even know they got together after hours to play until they talked about it later. I was the boss and sometimes inviting the boss feels weird. I know that's not true everywhere in every team. I know many bosses hang out with their team and enjoy social time. I was just new enough in this role where I didn't understand what was happening. Now I understand my role as the team leader isn't to be everyone's best friend, and frankly I wouldn't have played games with them very often because I had some important after work obligations that were high priority. Still being on the outside of some of those activities felt weird to me. At times I felt lonely. I felt alone in my seemingly impossible tasks with some of the political battles I was placed in and the unrealistic expectations I had in front of me. I worked to maintain respect from my team, while sometimes protecting them from decisions and communication they really didn't need distracting them. As the team leader, sometimes you're the one making final decisions. Some of those decisions are really hard to make and might rub some of your team members the wrong way. I thought I could give a little direction to my team and then have plenty of time to do my own coding or other work. I found I spent most of my time doing team leader tasks and it put me in a position where I really got away from development. My primary role was team leader and I realized if I didn't do what I needed to, who would? My team looked up to me and depended on me spending countless hours in meetings, meetings with customers, meetings with the team, or meetings with individuals. I felt like I was in meetings all the time. Part of my job as the team leader was to sell things to my team, I might sell them on a project or the last steps of a project we're feeling burnt out on. I might sell them on a user interface or certain ways things had to be done, even changes in processes. Because I had information from customers and organizational leaders, they didn't have it, I got to communicate and sometimes convince them of changes we needed to make. Continually selling ideas to developers who are typically very smart and analytical can contribute to the feeling that you are not one of them. Perhaps the thing that most contributes to these feelings of separation from your team is when there's a major problem, perhaps personality or people issues, you're the person that everyone looks to. They don't want to soft or a fake solution. They want you to get to the root cause and fix the problem. While this can be hard, it's one of the most important things you will do to preserve your team culture, the effectiveness of your team, and their trust in you. My advice is to be personable and try to develop relationships with your team, but realize that you are the boss and because of that you aren't buddies with everyone the way you might be if you weren't the boss. Getting too close to people can cause problems when you have to make changes or discipline them. At the same time, remember that in a few years you might be working under one of the people on your team. Change is inevitable, and I've found your professional relationships can last a lot longer than a particular role.

Preparing to Lead a Team
Years ago, I had the opportunity to lead a team of youth in a leadership simulation. I was new to this type of activity and felt inadequate to have the role I had. I remember going to two orientation meetings and then showing up the morning of the event. My peers had done a lot of preparation, but I honestly didn't know how I could have prepared. So after two orientations, I basically jumped in with both feet ready to learn as we went. Sometimes you'll have opportunities to lead teams that are put together very quickly, without giving you much time to prepare. In those situations, you'll find everything you've done up to that point, your education, previous roles, previous leadership experiences, mentoring, and examples from other leaders, will contribute to your leadership. You may feel ill prepared, but really all your experiences will have been part of your preparation. With that in mind, I'll share a dozen skills or characteristics you can work on now for when your leadership opportunity comes up. Really, this is just my list. You should come up with your own list. You can spend years, decades working on these skills. If you're already a team leader, I encourage you to be intentional about each skill on your own list and make time to learn more about and practice them. First, team leaders need organizational skills. Your team will expect you to quote unquote, be on top of things. If you're disorganized, miss meetings and deadlines, and don't follow through on your commitments, they'll lose trust in you. If you need help with organization, consider bringing someone on that can help you be more organized. Second, you'll need someone on your team who is good at scheduling and you need to understand the fundamentals of scheduling. Poor scheduling practices can have a great impact on your team and their morale. If you have ambiguity or people who are over scheduled, you'll have a frustrated team. This seems like a pretty simple, straightforward skill, but it can easily be messed up. Third, you should be proficient in estimating project completion. As a team leader, you'll need to report up and down on where projects are at. Estimating project or phase completion wrong, whether overly optimistic or too conservative, can have an impact on the next stages. It can also create a lack of trust from those you are giving estimates to, causing them to wonder if you really know what's going on. Fourth, you should have a basic understanding of strategy and the strategy of your organization, and how your team fits into that strategy. Understanding strategy can help you make better decisions when your team is faced with big challenges. It can help you know what and when to communicate to others. Sometimes being a team leader will feel like you are playing chess against a very savvy opponents. Fifth, a strong team leader is skilled in bringing out the best from each team member. Bringing out the best in each person comes from recognizing, understanding, and respecting the strengths each person brings and helping each person contribute according to those strengths. Not only does this help each person bring their optimal value to the team, it helps them feel appreciated and valued, which is something you definitely want. Sixth, practicing diplomacy or being tactful can help you become a more effective team leader. I'm reminded of a mantra from an old boss who regularly repeated that you catch more flies with honey than with vinegar. This is someone who had to make hard decisions that would impact people's lives. Even in the hardest decisions I saw him work through, he was a model of diplomacy. I'm still working on this one. Seventh, every team leader should have enhanced communication skills. Identify where you have opportunities to improve in written and verbal communication and work on those skills. You should have plenty of opportunities to work on your communication. I found that when we have a leadership role, we have to be extra careful with what and how we communicate. Eighth, you need to learn how to effectively influence others. You will likely have plenty of opportunities to influence people on your team, customers, your managers, and others. You can be heavy handed and use your authority as the team leader, which is definitely one way to influence. That's not my style. Let me recommend the classic book, "How to Win Friends and Influence People." Ninth, I strongly encourage you to learn about quality control or quality assurance. Dr. Deming made an entire career and changed the manufacturing industry by focusing on quality control principles. As the team leader, you are responsible for the outcome of your team and you can't say, Well the people in charge of QA failed. Tenth, you should learn the ins and outs of reporting. Kevin Miller has an excellent course here on Pluralsight about metrics and reporting for managers. Check out that course to come up to speed on what you should be thinking about, as well as get access to worksheets you can use right now. Reports and reporting can seem tedious, but reporting can be the difference between your team's success or failure. Eleventh, as the team leader, you should have ample opportunity to make presentations to other people in a boardroom setting. This is a powerful skill. If you're uncomfortable making presentations to groups, I encourage you to look at some of the presentation courses in the Pluralsight library, and one of the best ways to improve is to practice. Do more group presentations. Twelfth, you should become skilled in leading meetings. Don't be the team leader who is known for having boring, useless, ineffective meetings. Learn how to run and lead meetings effectively and even how to avoid having meetings. Pay attention to starting and ending times, make sure you have an agenda, and the main points were actually discussed or resolved. Know how to recover from a sidetracked meeting. One of the best ways to learn how to run better meetings is to pay attention in the meetings you attend that others run. What can you learn from them? What things should you do or not do to have better meetings? There you go, a dozen skills you could work on to be a better team leader. Of course there are many courses in Pluralsight that can help with these and other skills. None of these will be perfected overnight. But as you purposefully work on these skills, your effectiveness as a team leader should increase and you should see the results manifested in how your team acts, reacts, and performs. One last bit of advice, don't worry about working on all of these at once. Pick one or two skills and focus on improving those. Once you feel comfortable with those, add another skill. Improving your soft skills is really more of a marathon than a sprint.

The Five Stages of a Team’s Life Cycle
Understanding the five stages of a team's lifecycle can help you understand your team's dynamics and why the dynamics might change. This is much studied and taught about in organizational behavior classes, which means there are plenty of books, articles, and other resources that go deeper into the concept of the stages of a team lifecycle than what I'll cover. If you understand the dynamics of your team during each of the five stages, you'll be better prepared to influence, persuade, communicate, and motivate your team. Let's talk about each of the five stages. I remember learning about these in college thinking the definitions and approach were too academic and clinical. As I've spent time in different organizations and industries and on a variety of teams, I've learned that these stages really play out and are important to understand. The first stage of a new team is called forming, that is forming or creating the team, this is an exciting time. People are excited to be on the team, they've tied up loose ends from their other projects and are ready to contribute to this team. In the forming stage, you're kind of in a honeymoon phase, people are optimistic, they want to be there, and they want to contribute. During this stage you can lay a good foundation that will impact the other stages. Make sure you let your team members really get to know one another. This could happen during offsite meetings or through meetings where people get to learn from or about one another. Let your team know what the purpose and expectations are, timelines, and any important systems or processes. This is a great time to share your vision. The next stage in the team development lifecycle is called storming. When you get to the storming stage, the excitement has begun to wear off and people are experiencing frustration. They might feel like they aren't getting enough information or don't have the right resources. Perhaps they realize the specs don't make sense or change too often. Quirks from their colleagues are apparent. The storming stage can feel chaotic. During the storming stage, you want to make sure you clarify roles and expectations and regularly revisit the vision. The team leader should try to resolve conflict and differences quickly. The next stage is called the norming stage. This is when people start to settle into their work. They understand the vision, their roles, and expectations. There's less frustration than when the team was storming. Researchers say during this stage, the team leader tends to focus on the project and not do as much with individuals on the team. I think this might happen because of the fatigue of navigating the previous stage. They say coaching, mentoring, and communicating tend to decrease. Watch out for this and make sure you give individual team members the time and attention they need. After the norming stage, you will move into the performing stage. This is where the team is functioning at a very high level and things seem to be going very well. As with the norming stage, you'll want to continue to be attentive to your team members needs and concerns. The project will seem to be progressing nicely, but you still need to communicate, inspire, train, and fulfill other roles your team expects from you as their leader. The last stage may sometimes be ignored, but it is inevitable. This is the adjourning stage, which is how the team finishes. It's important you prepare for and pay special attention to this stage. People naturally worry about what's next in their career and where they might go. If the project was successful, they might see some fun opportunities. If the project was not successful, they might be concerned about their options. Change is hard for all of us. As a team leader, you are in the position where you can help each individual have a smooth transition to whatever is next. Those are the five stages of the team lifecycle They are natural and inevitable. How long you spend in each stage depends on various factors, but you can imagine each stage will have an impact on how your team operates and how you should lead your team.

Creating a Culture of Communication
When I put my teams together or when I first hire someone, one of the most important conversations I have is about communication. My main message is that of all the things I expect from them, communication is number one. Of course, I expect them to be competent in their job and hopefully I've done a good job assessing their abilities. I expect them to not be jerks and to add to the team culture. Again, this is on me and my ability to assess their fit before I extend them an opportunity. When they come on, I emphasize how important communication is to me. In my teams, I work hard to create a culture where communication is easy, expected, and rewarded. I talk about how I have brought people onto my team to bring their best ideas and work. I expect them to perform at a high level. I recognize that they'll have ideas that are different than, even contradictory to my ideas. I'm okay with that. It's important for each person to understand that I know I don't have all the answers and I brought them on to expand our abilities. I need them to communicate their ideas, I need them to push back on our direction and how we do things. Sometimes you get someone who is afraid to speak up because they are the new person or because they are worried about saying something contradictory to the boss. This can be seen where there are cultural differences. People from some cultures have been taught to not be contradictory or to offer ideas against what the boss has said. Sometimes you see this when someone is coming from a toxic work environment and they don't want to disrupt the power structure. I beg my team to disrupt. I have seen too many good ideas from different people to discount them. Now, whether we adopt their ideas or not, that's another thing, but we certainly welcome them. We discuss them and we value them. I should say, I've worked with people who have taken years to really come into this way of thinking, but I continually work with them and train them to be more open. I'm not talking about creating a contentious work environment. I once worked with a manager who said that, "In Good to Great," the landmark book on company success, author Jim Collins wrote, "Great companies had hard conversations." The manager cited Jim Collins while defending his contentious, argumentative nature. He was a bully and used this principle to defend his bullying. I'm not saying that at all. I think this communication needs to be given with and received with respect. Respectful communication is part of my team culture, but I don't want someone to think, "I'm too new" or "I'm not the boss" or "They've been here longer than I have" and not bring good, strong, or the right ideas to the table. The other communication expectation I bring up up front and continue talking about as appropriate, is my expectation to be kept current on things. I learned this when I was a developer and then managed developers. Here's an analogy, let's say a customer wants a programming project. The customer sits down with a product manager or developer or whoever and they go through the specs. This is a massive project, let's say it takes a year to finish. The dev team comes back to the customer after a year and says, "Here it is, we're done. Here's our invoice." The customer looks at the final product and is confused. The final product looks nothing like what she asked for or thought she asked for. This scenario has played out across the globe for decades. And it is happening today because we aren't communicating enough. Of course, nowadays we have systems or processes in place to help avoid this type of outcome. The agile methodology should help prevent this from ever happening because there is constant communication and checking in. Going back to a culture of communication, I want you to check in with me. Need time off? Check in with me! Can't make it in or need to change your work hours this week? Check in with me! Stuck on your projects? Let me know! I'm not a micromanager. My team will attest to that. But my baseline assumption is that you are doing well and making progress. If you have needs, whether that's information, resources, adjustments to expectations or deadlines, whatever your needs are, communicate. I'll check in with you but I need you to know that even though I might seem busy to you, I want, I crave this type of communication. Doing this creates a culture of communication. You need to honor what you commit yourself to and reward or incentivize your team when they communicate well. I'm not saying you have to give bonuses or cash, just recognizing their communication, ideas, and contributions could be the reward and incentive they need.

Summary
In this module, we talked about what you can do to become a better team leader. We talked about feelings of imposter syndrome and insecurity. We talked about leadership skills and attributes that will help you be more effective as you lead your team. We talked about the responsibilities and expectations of the team, and the idea that you are no longer a regular team member and what that means. We talked about 12 specific areas you could work on to be a more effective team leader. We talked about team dynamics and the five stages of the team lifecycle. We talked about the importance of communication and how you can create a culture where communication is easy, expected, and rewarded. Remember, I created a playlist, or a channel of courses, for team leaders. Look in the exercise files area of this course. In the next module, we'll talk about steps to take when starting a new team. Let's go!

Creating Teams That Work
Introduction
In this module, we talk about what goes into creating effective teams. If you have a new opportunity to lead a team, you might be as nervous as you are excited. Where do you start? How can you help your team have the right foundation? Let's talk about starting and creating your successful team.

Creating the Team Foundation
As the team leader, it's critical you lay the foundation and communicate expectations right away. You can't assume everyone will already know what the team's foundational principles will be. This is your opportunity to start to define and work towards a team culture. You could have a meeting to talk about your team goals, vision, or objective. I've seen some leaders declare each of these giving definition and direction to their team. I've seen other leaders open this conversation up with a brainstorming session, with the idea that if the team comes up with foundational principles, they have more buy‑in and will respect what they come up with more than if the foundation were just handed to them. There's a great Harvard Business Review article that breaks down the early stages of forming a team with three important objectives. In the exercise files, you'll find a link to the article I reference. The first objective is to establish group norms. Norms might look like rules, you might consider them boundaries of how people act and how things are done. In the past, I've come up with my own list of norms that are important to me, shared that list with my new team, and asked what additions or modifications they would make. Because of everyone's experiences in good and bad teams, they'll usually bring great ideas to help refine your list and create a list of norms for your new team. It's critical that everyone knows what the team's norms are, which means you should probably communicate them up front and for the duration of the team. Norms aren't necessarily rules, but they can influence rules. Think of norms more as guidelines or this is how our team works. For example, a group norm might be that each person is empowered to make certain decisions on their own, without getting approval. Another group norm might be how the team communicates. For example, decisions made by one person should be documented in the task management system with an explanation of the decision and justification why the decision was made. These two norms might sound like extra work or bureaucracy, but what they do is ensure each person can make a certain level of decisions while maintaining a high level of communication in a central place. Norms let people know how your team functions and what the expectations and roles are. You can define norms for communication, conflict resolution, anything that will help your team know what they can do to be successful. The second objective from this article was to establish clear goals. Just as you as the team leader needs to understand the goals and objectives of the team, your team needs to know what they are working towards. Establishing clear goals will help your team know what the team's success will be. Clearly established goals will help everyone know how they will be evaluated. You should let people know what you expect of them and how you will measure their performance. Your priorities as the team leader should be aligned with the team goals and objectives. When there isn't a question about these goals, everyone can confidently work towards the same thing. The third objective is to create the right environment. The right environment could mean helping everyone feel comfortable and motivated to contribute. Here are three ideas to create this type of environment. First, show appreciation when team members share an idea. A lot of people feel nervous about sharing ideas. We're worried about sounding dumb. When you show genuine appreciation, you create an environment where ideas are actually welcome. Some of us have worked on teams where ideas weren't welcome and just this simple gesture helps you create the right environment. Second, teach your team to respect silence in meetings. I was at a treat where the facilitator was giving instructions for a brainstorm session we were about to have, he was establishing team norms. He said the silence during a brainstorming session was okay, it was good, it was healthy. He said people generally feel uncomfortable with silence and feel an urge to fill in the silence, even when they don't have anything meaningful to add. When we respect silence, he said, and allow it to have a place in our meetings our results would be better. And they were better. I've thought about that and shared this in my brainstorming sessions for years. This is an example of creating the right environment. Third, when you introduce people on your team to one another, recognize the skills and talents they bring to the table. This helps everyone get to know one another, and it shows you are aware of, watching, and appreciative of what people do. This shows your team how much you care about them and value their contributions. The ideas presented in this article to create norms, establish clear goals, and nurture this type of environment will help you create a strong foundation for your team.

Getting Off to a Good Start
Think of the first few interactions with your team as the first impression. They say you can never have a second first impression. What can you do to have the right first impression and get your team off to a good start? Before you implement any tactics to get off to a good start, write down what your goals are as a team leader. Your goals might be to have a group that gets along and brings the best out of one another. You might want to create a team culture and emphasize the value and importance of each person on the team. You might want to build confidence around the probability of success of the team or confidence in the team you have built. You want to emphasize loyalty or create a culture where failure is okay, as long as you learn from failed attempts. Your written goals will help you come up with the best tactics at this stage. Here are some specific ideas to consider. Do get‑to‑know‑you activities so the team can learn more about one another. This might be a meeting where everyone shares a few factoids about themselves, such as their background, aspirations, and hobbies or passions. Or, in one of your first meetings you can have two or three people do that, like an employee spotlight. This can help people really feel like they are part of the team. Do trust building exercises when you plan these, consider the makeup of your team and the culture you want to create. As Stephen Covey says, "Begin with the end in mind." Know why you are doing these exercises. If your team is particularly adventurous, maybe you do something really crazy. The level of crazy depends on what you're after and considers what each person would be okay with. Something like this would be exceptionally crazy, but people who do this would talk about it for years. Whether you do something like this mud run or you do the trust fall where someone stands on a chair or a table and falls back for the rest of the team to catch them, respect each individual's boundaries. I have some fear of heights issues that probably came from falling through a roof when I was a kid and I would not like to do the trust fall. From the beginning, when you communicate the team goals, talk about any type of rewards or incentive system you can put in place. There are some great ways to reward and incentivize people that don't have to do with adding to your budget. Although, if you can get an incentives budget that could be meaningful. Your reward system could include peer and manager recognition, access to special parking, even days off. Talk with your leadership, and even your team, to find out what kinds of incentives you could put in place. This doesn't have to be overly formal, but you want to be strategic about this and offer meaningful incentives. Whatever systems and processes you start with realize you may have to tweak them as time goes on or you may have to abandon them. If you are in a team that moves quickly and the goals or targets are subject to change, you'll need to be flexible. Doing things like these intentionally will help you establish a strong team environment and culture. The key is to know your goals and make sure each activity you put in place is aligned with those goals.

Success Metrics
When you understand the purpose of your team, you can develop a set of metrics to help you ensure you're on track. Neglecting key metrics can mean your team is exceptionally busy and may be doing great things, but they might not be making progress on the team's defined objectives. That can actually be okay. Especially if the stated objective should be redefined based on changing circumstances. If that happens, the success metrics should be adjusted. There are three common success metrics I hear about. They are sometimes used interchangeably but they really are different. They are KPIs, which stands for key performance indicators. KSFs, which are key success factors. And OKRs, which are objectives and key results. While each of these are different, your organization might use them differently than other organizations. I don't care as much what you call them as how you use them. It's critical that you don't overcomplicate things. Whether your team is big or small, whether you plan to be together for two weeks or two years, the more complicated your metrics systems are, the more likely they will fail. In Kevin Miller's course, Managing IT: Metrics and Measurements, he says that every metric has a cost. The more things you measure, the more costly your metric system will be. That cost could be in time to gather, process, analyze, or even consume your metrics. More than the cost, though, complex systems have a way of being cast aside. People need to focus on their jobs and know a handful of metrics, not go through pages and pages of criteria or data. Unless, of course, their job is to go through pages and pages of criteria or data. Back to your KPIs, OKRs, and KSFs, they each have a different purpose. Study them and determine what you really need to measure. Figure out, perhaps with your team, what measurements you could and should keep track of and how you will keep track of them. If something is too hard to measure, and knowing the measurement gives you a nominal benefit, perhaps discard it. I'd rather focus on a handful of key metrics than track, say, a hundred things we could track. Kevin's course on metrics and measurements goes deeper on what you could and should measure, so be sure to check that out. I work on a few web projects and some of the metrics my team measures include, data we get from our web analytics. I'm mostly interested in visitors in a time period. Number of upgrades, number of shopping cart abandons, user complaints or bug reports, especially looking for consistently reported issues, and number of leads. As a team leader, I'm keeping track of new sales and expenses. I want to tie our activity, including UX changes and marketing work into new sales. These are the things that might cause me to lose sleep. Just a handful of things that are important to me, nothing overwhelming or hard to keep track of. I can tie everything I focus on back to those things. Can you deduce my goals based on what I'm measuring? I want to see increased revenue that is profitable and sustainable. As with other ideas, I've talked about, make sure your metrics tie back to your objectives. Aligning your metrics to your objectives can help you align your tasks and work, which should help you develop an efficient and effective team.

Reinforcing Communication
In all of my courses, I talk about communication. Communication is key to personal and professional relationships. The better we communicate, the better we understand and can influence others. Communication is not the easiest thing we do. We should constantly work to improve our communication. I think a team leader who consistently communicates well, teaches their team to trust them and in turn communicate well. One of the most important aspects of communication is that even though we say or write something once, we'll likely have to repeat it more than we think we should. This makes me think of talking to a two or three year old who continually asks, why? I'm not saying your team is like a two or three year old baby, but while it might be frustrating, repeating your message can be a critical part of your effective communication. Here's an example of when this is critical. Let's say in the first meeting with your team, you present the team's goals and your vision, this is an exciting time and your team feels how excited you are. They're excited and can't wait to get to work. A couple months later, after not having repeated your goals or vision, your team is stressed and you can feel people checking out. They aren't bringing their ideas or their excitement like they did early on. It's easy for a team to lose momentum when they focus on routine tasks without remembering why they are doing things. Contrast that to a team that has routine tasks, but they are constantly reminded of the vision. The vision is something much bigger than a task. For example, at my company, Jibber Jobber, we help people during their job search. My team can get caught up in the tedium of DevOps, fixing bugs, updating the interface, or doing customer support, and coming to work will just be a job. But as we talk about the people we are impacting, the person who just lost their job and is scared thinking about their future or the person who has been using our system for months and is now facing eviction, we become more empathetic. We don't think about fixing this thing because it's one of hundreds of things in our task management system. We think about what we do so Julie can have a more delightful experience. You can't communicate that just once and hope it sticks. The why is something you should communicate regularly. Other things you might communicate regularly include the team mission, the team objectives, what success looks like, and how individual roles contribute to the team's success. For example, people who interface with customers, internal or external, are collecting customer feedback regularly, but that feedback might never make it to the dev team, the ops team, or the QA team. You should facilitate that communication and help those teams who don't interface with customers understand the bigger why and who their work is impacting. Now that we've established what you consistently communicate, I want to talk about how to do it. When you communicate for reinforcement of ideas, you need to be clear. You can't be ambiguous, especially early on when people need to clearly understand what you are saying. You don't want people to come back weeks or months later and say, Oh, I think I understand what you were trying to say. If you hear that you weren't clear enough. Clarity comes when you remove jargon, cliché, even sarcasm and misleading humor from your messaging. Expect the words and phrases you choose to use as the team leader to be repeated by your team internally and externally. Some words will be misunderstood by people outside of your team. For example, your customers and stakeholders. When you use words and phrases your customers and stakeholders use and normalize that in your team instead of using internal jargon, you'll reinforce good language and reduce confusion. I've been in many meetings where people ask for clarification about a project or a status or an issue because internal jargon is used, and not everyone at the meeting knows the jargon. You may choose to adopt the customer's jargon. The goal is better understanding by everyone. To reinforce your messages, post them in a central location and then refer back to that post. Expect to repeat your message again and again and be okay with that. I'd rather my team asked me for clarity multiple times rather than wrongly assume something. You can repeat the same phrase or message multiple times, maybe in a team meeting, and then in a group email, and then to someone in your office. Try not to get frustrated at having to repeat the same message over and over. I consider it a good thing when people ask me to clarify something, even if it's something I feel like I've repeated 20 times before. I can polish my message and understand where I've been unclear and communicate better next time. Your goal with this type of communication is to reinforce your mission and vision and the importance of each person's contributions.

Optimizing Your Team Size
Have you thought about the best size for your team? If your team is too small, people feel overworked or you don't have the specialists needed for complex projects. If your team is too big, you have people that don't have work to do and you might create a culture of not getting things done. But what is the right team size to meet your objectives? There's a tendency to think about projects in a number of hours needed to complete. Let's say you have an estimated 500 hours needed to complete your project. Based on the deadline, which is 2.5 weeks from the time you start, you figure each person will work about 100 hours, which means you need five people on your team. Five people times 100 hours equals the 500 hours I need to finish this project, right? Well, what if I had 10 people? If I had 10 people on the project, I could get it done in half the time. That's pretty cool. But wait, this simple math can be deceiving. In 1975, the first edition of "The Mythical Man‑month" was published. The author, Fred Brooks, proposed that adding more people actually makes software projects take longer. Why would that be? Before we go into that question, here are three quotes attributed to Fred Brooks. "What one programmer can do in one month, two programmers can do in two months." "Nine people can't make a baby in a month." "Adding manpower to a late software project makes it later." These statements are funny and I can imagine you can see the truth or wisdom in each of them. I've experienced the impact of adding more people to a project. Hey, if we give you two more people, can you get this done faster? Um, well, now we're back at that simple math problem of 500 hours, but we're not appreciating the impact of what adding two more people means. Adding more people beyond what you need adds more management complexity. You're adding more personalities to the mix and ideas of how to do things. You can't add another person without impacting your team culture. I'm not saying these changes and impacts will all be negative, but they will change things. As the team leader, you need to assess how appropriate the size of your team is. If your lead contributors are justifiably feeling too stressed and could use help getting work done, you get to assess what kind of stress that is and whether adding more people or moving deadlines would be a better option. If you find people are distracted and distracting others, perhaps you have too many people on your team. It's part of your job to assess your resources and make or request changes as appropriate. I was working on a project where we went from one developer to two developers. I didn't think much of it. We just add another person and bring them up to speed, right? I was in for a surprise, adding the second developer added a lot of complexity. We had to change how we released and QA'd code, how we communicated about project statuses and changes, as well as how we worked with QA, the project manager, and our customer interface. We had to figure out who was responsible for what, which meant who wasn't responsible for other things. When we added another person, we multiplied the complexity of our team. Of course, that forced us to put systems and processes in place that made it a lot easier to add a third or fourth developer. People talk about an optimal team size of being between 3‑7 people and if your team is much bigger than that, you'll probably see smaller teams form within your big team. Maybe as the leader, you let these sub teams organically form or you explicitly define the sub teams. Here are issues to consider when it comes to finding your optimal team size. First, beware of unnecessary politics and red tape, which can happen at any team size but gets worse as a team gets bigger. Imagine the rules and processes a team of a hundred developers need that a team of 2 or 3 don't need. Keep a close eye on how rules and processes evolve. Having too many or having too much strictness can be stifling and frustrating. Second, beware of communication challenges. As your team grows, potential for miscommunication and confusion can increase. People don't get the information they need in a timely manner or they get too much information and they can't go through it all. As you see communication issues come up, you'll need to address them head on and maybe consider changing the size of your team. Third, larger teams have their own problems. People are less productive or are not responsible for their work. When people don't have ownership of issues or input into direction, it's easy to kind of take a back seat. Contrast that to a team of 2 or 3 where it's harder to not be responsible or take ownership. Your team size might need to change as your project and requirements change. Perhaps you start small and grow as needed or you start with a full team, but move a few people off your team when their contributions are done. Don't think you need to end with the same size you started with. Just remember, as you transition people off your team, do it with dignity and appreciation. Some people might feel like getting released from the team before others is an indication of their work or your confidence in them, which might not be the case at all.

Who Is on Your Team
One of my favorite parts of "Good to Great", the book by Jim Collins, is where he talks about making sure you get the right people on the bus. That is, your company or your team is the bus, and you want to make sure you have the right people. He talks about even getting the right people on the bus, even if you don't have a specific role for them yet. That isn't realistic for a lot of us building small, temporary teams, but it's still a great idea if you can afford it. In a perfect world, we would be able to choose who is on our own team. However, sometimes we inherit a team or parts of a team and the team members are new to us. Maybe we wouldn't have chosen them, if we had a choice. I was involved in an organizational merger where people I hired were put on an existing team. Fortunately everyone on the team was great and we fit together really well, but that isn't always the case. I've seen teams where someone was put on because they were the boss's kid or because they were getting moved out of another team where they weren't a good fit and they had to go somewhere. This can work or it can really disrupt what you are trying to build. When I build teams, I have a few considerations. The first and most important is technical competency. I don't need the very best, the fabled 10x programmer, but I do need people who can actually do the job. You need to understand the technical requirements of tasks you have, whether that's development, or QA, or project management, or whatever, and bring people on your team who can do the job with little to no training in the craft you're hiring them for. Although you will need to train them for any organization or team nuances. Just be careful to not exclude someone who would be a great fit and could learn the job in an acceptable timeframe, even if they can't perform right away. My second consideration is the culture fit. I know some people disagree with the idea of a culture fit. There's pretty intense conversation that people only want to work with people like them, which means there isn't much diversity of thought or experience on a team. I know there are problems with this idea of culture fit, but we still need to hire people who we think we would like to work with or at least get along with. I do my technical competency, or proficiency analysis, pretty early on. If I need a developer with a certain amount of experience, I will only consider developers with at least that amount of experience. Then, I can stack up each developer I want to learn more about based on their skills and proficiencies. This is where the pre‑interview communication comes in, as well as the interviews. I might ask for some clarification about technical proficiencies, but mostly I focus on a conversation that helps me understand what the person is like, how they think, how they have solved problems in the past, or other things that help me get to know them. The way I do it, technical proficiency is a given to get on my short list and culture fit is the factor that likely sways me to bringing you on my team. My third consideration is an assessment of extra value they could bring to the team. That might be a deep understanding of the industry or important industry connections they could tap into. Perhaps they are excellent with soft skills and since you already hired a few people who are really lacking those soft skills, their soft skills would be a great addition to round out the team and help accomplish the team's objectives. One thing to note, there might be someone who is the right person for my team, is highly competent, but isn't exactly the best culture fit. There are reasons I'll bring that person on anyway, as long as they aren't toxic. My objective isn't to have everyone be best friends, it's to get the job done. But I stay away from toxic people.

Strategic Adjournment
Years ago I was talking with a lawyer about a business contract we were reviewing, I remember something profound he taught me. Contracts are critical to help each party know how to terminate the relationship. Up to that point, I hadn't thought about going into a business relationship with the intent to end it. In my naïve mind, I probably thought you would get into great relationships and stay in them forever, but the wisdom of defining what an ideal ending looks like is something we can all learn from. In Stephen Covey's book, "The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People," he says the second habit is to begin with the end in mind. If you want to be a successful team leader, you need to seriously think about the end or, as we talked about in the five stages of the team, the fifth stage, adjourning. I said this is something we overlook, but I want you to be more intentional about adjourning instead of letting it haphazardly happen. Adjourning an awesome team can be like ending an awesome book. I have found myself reading the last few pages of a book I've really enjoyed slowly, almost hesitant to read the last sentence. I didn't want it to end. People on your team might feel the same way. You might have been the best leader for them or they might have the best coworkers or their contributions might have made a huge impact on others or they finally felt recognized and appreciated. Of course, others might be ready for a change, but for some people adjourning your team might be a real shock, especially if your team ends sooner than expected. I think just about everyone is wired to be adverse to change. Change brings so much stress to most of us. Early in my career, I worked at a company that moved the entire office to another city across the state. I don't think management understood how hard that was going to be and how many people they would lose by making that change. This wasn't changing somebody from one seat to another, which can be stressful enough for some people, these were big changes that would impact just about every aspect of their life. When you think about the end of your team, think about the acronym WIIFM. WIIFM stands for what's in it for me? This is what people on your team are thinking. What will happen to them? Do they need to look for a new job? Do they even want to go back to their old team? As you keep their needs and concerns in mind, you'll be able to think through the adjourning stage in a way that will help them, and helping people through this stage is the opposite of burning bridges. Helping others transition to whatever is next will help you have a strong professional network for years to come. One of the most powerful end of team or end of project tactics I've ever seen was called a debrief. The debrief allows you to sit down and say, "Okay, we just took a part in something that was really big and really impactful. Let's talk about it." Sometimes we talk about the operations, the logistics, things that happened and things people said, we talk about the team and team dynamics, we talk about what worked, what didn't work, and what we learned. A debrief is a great way of getting closure on a particular project, which helps everyone transition to whatever's next for them. If this sounds like a postmortem, there are similarities, but I found a postmortem is more about what went wrong and how do we do this better next time, where a debrief is a lot more open. The objective might be to just talk about what happened and what we can learn, but not necessarily fix a system or process. As the team leader, you should help people understand what their options are. You should write letters of recommendation for your team members, consider writing LinkedIn recommendations. I've heard of team leaders who make introductions for people who were on their team. These simple gestures can be so meaningful to people who have respected you as their leader. These are things you could encourage other team members to do. If you've created a strong positive team culture, they'll be anxious to help one another. They'll be excited to stay in touch professionally. Just because your team and projects end doesn't mean your relationships end. The professional relationships you have worked with could be important to each of you for decades to come.

Feedback Mechanisms
One of my favorite experiences in my last job was what we called one‑on‑ones. Perhaps your company already does these and you've known about them for years. They were new to me and I loved everything about them. One‑on‑ones were weekly meetings with my boss and sometimes my boss's boss. My boss was very personable and he made sure our meeting started out talking about me and what was going on in my life. It was kind of weird to have such a casual conversation, but the entire organization prided themselves on building a work environment where people loved to come to work and part of that was to develop real relationships with one another. Getting to know our coworkers was just part of the culture. In addition to talking about what was going on in my life, which might have been a one minute conversation, or it could have taken up all the time. We talked about business. We talked about projects, how things were going, ideas, suggestions, statuses, everything that was important to move our work forward. A friend's boss would watch TED Talks with her and then they would discuss the talk and how it could apply to either of them or their team. She found that very rewarding. They used this time for professional development, catered to my friends needs. One‑on‑ones are a great tactic to have a more unified environment, as well as ensure there are consistent and appropriate channels of communication. Have you ever tried meeting with your boss, but they were always too busy? One‑on‑ones is the exact opposite of that. Of course my boss was busy, but when it was one‑on‑one time it was just me and the boss. Traditionally, many organizations will have an annual review, sometimes called an annual performance review. Annual reviews can be a bit messy though. It's hard to talk about behavior or results from 11 months ago because either you have both forgotten about them or because they just aren't relevant anymore. So you tend to spend more time on the last, say six weeks. Not a great way to review performance and give input. Also, the purpose of this type of review is usually tied into some kind of raise or compensation adjustment. It's hard to have real conversations when one party is really hoping for a respectable increase in pay. There are other ways to ensure you and your team are giving the right feedback at the right times. A peer or manager recognition system where people on the team can get real feedback and praise from you and their peers can go a long ways to influence behavior, performance, and attitudes. As a manager, you want to make sure you have created a culture where people know they can bring ideas to you or the team and they will be heard and respected. This happens as everyone improves their active listening and presentation skills and people on your team respect one another. When your team culture has this kind of respect, you can talk about things to help each person improve. You can work on issues that come up, whether they have to do with work ethic or interpersonal issues. Your team feels you care about them more than just as a contributor, but really about their life and their career success. This starts with you putting the right elements into place where they are comfortable sharing and receiving the right feedback. When people know they are on track or that you're helping them get on track, they can perform with more confidence and your team will see the benefits of their efforts.

Summary
In this module, we talked about creating and forming your team. We talked about creating a solid team foundation, figuring out who to put on your team, thoughts about team size, getting off to a good start, success metrics, the importance of creating a culture of communication, looking forward to ending the team, and feedback mechanisms for team members. In the next module, we're going to talk about specific tactics to manage and lead a successful team.

Leading a Successful Team
Introduction
By this time, you have a great idea of your role and responsibilities, expectations of you as a team leader, and considerations for putting your team together. In this module, we'll talk about some of the most important things every team leader needs to understand and spend time on to really lead their team to success. Let's get started.

Creating a Team Culture
One of the most important things you'll do as a team leader is create a team culture. If you don't create a team culture, you'll end up with a culture that might not be what you want. Everything we've talked about in this course so far are things that will help you create, impact, or reinforce your team culture. I strongly encourage you to intentionally create your culture instead of just letting it come together without any intention. How do you do this? With planning and consistency? Here are some steps on how to intentionally create a team culture. Define what you want your culture to look like. You write this down with as much detail as you can. You write this down to refer back to and even polish, as needed. You write it down so you can share it with others. The culture you want doesn't need to be a secret. Once you have this defined you can figure out a plan to work backwards from your definition. Optimize the right communication. I love reducing confusion, clarifying expectations, and having open communication where people feel like they have a voice and influence. Define what having the right communication within your team is and then work backwards from your definition to get there. For example, you might define the why, what, and how of meetings. Don't let meetings drift from their purpose or value. No one wants to have a meeting just to have a meeting. That can destroy an otherwise positive team culture. Create an environment where people know they can and should ask questions and even challenge ideas and processes. You create that environment when you express gratitude for their questions and ideas. A lot of people feel like they are risking perhaps their reputation or credibility when they ask questions. When they feel safe to voice their ideas or challenge things, you're more likely to get their best ideas. To create a culture of ingenuity, I allow people to fail and even celebrate their failure. In another course, I talked about the "Church of Fail", which I read about online. The article described a company that invited people to come together once a week and confess the failures they've had. They created a culture where failure was recognized and celebrated, letting everyone know it's okay to fail as long as they recover and learn from their failure. We all know, recognizing wins people have is critical, but don't hide or be ashamed of failure that we should learn from. A great tactic to learn from failure is a debrief, sometimes called a postmortem. People want to feel heard and understood. You can help them feel this way by asking questions and digging deeper into their ideas, instead of just assuming. In my course, Becoming a Better Listener, I talk about active listening, which is a phenomenal way to help people feel heard and understood. I like to help people who tend to be quiet have an opportunity to express themselves. I found sometimes there are brilliant people with brilliant ideas that never get heard because the louder people take up the conversation. You don't want to lose those ideas or that talent. Sometimes in meetings I'll say, "John what do you think about this?" That gives them an opening and perhaps permission to share their ideas without being talked over. If their personality is such that they won't share much, I might ask them one‑on‑one outside of a meeting or even in written format. Another component of the culture I like to create is having the right issues resolved right the first time. When talking about software projects for example, I work hard to have the right projects, problems, and issues listed in our ticketing system with the appropriate amount of details so my team can understand real problems and address the right issues. When talking about interpersonal issues, I want to address those as soon as possible so they don't grow out of control. As the team leader, you need to recognize these personal issues, validate feelings, and take care of your team members. When you take action quickly and thoroughly, you create a culture where people know you don't let issues get in the way of the purpose of the team. I like to create a culture where we focus on solving root problems instead of addressing things at a superficial level. Addressing root issues helps us do things right the first time, so we aren't burdened with a lot of unnecessary and distracting rework. One way to ensure our work is done right the first time is to follow up with affected parties, or our customers, to see if our solution was the right solution. Sometimes we think a project is done or a problem is resolved, but the people who are most impacted don't agree. These are some actionable, tactical things I do to intentionally create a team culture. I want. What will you do to intentionally create and influence your team culture?

Creating a Cohesive Team
Leading a successful team doesn't mean everyone is best friends, but it might mean you need a certain amount of respect for and the ability to work with one another. Don't mistake friendship and hanging out after hours with professional respect. I want people on my teams to work with one another well. I don't want to have to deal with arguments based on personality or likes or dislikes, but my team knows we welcome arguments based on best practices, what we should do, and how we do things. We're always looking for optimization and to get there we have to have conversations that sometimes feel intense. You can have intense conversations and still have a cohesive team environment. When your team members respect what each person brings to the team and appropriately stands up for one another, you are seeing the fruits of having built a cohesive team. So how do you get there? Here are some ideas. It is of utmost importance that you understand the team leader sets the example to create a cohesive team. This starts with you. You need to model respect, which is done in how you talk to and about each person on the team. Once you start dismissing one team member, you are opening the door for others to dismiss any team member. Recognition programs where you or another team member can highlight what someone has done can go a long way. This shows each person that work, ideas, and results are valued. I have learned from one of my favorite leaders that this is done consistently, maybe even daily. When the team leader models this, team members tend to recognize one another more frequently. Recognizing accomplishments and expressing appreciation is a great way to build cohesiveness. While your job isn't to make everyone friends with one another, you can certainly encourage people to get to know one another. Maybe in meetings, you set aside time to highlight a person or do an open question format where team members can ask questions of another person, encourage small talk, whether in your meetings, in the cafeteria, or even in the hallway. If your personality is like mine, watching people hang out and chat for a while can seem wasteful and you want them to get back to work, but don't squash it if it happens. The time we spend getting to know one another can do a lot for building trust in our teams. If you have the budget and the time consider external retreats or after hour get togethers. I was watching a team do a lot of offsites and wondering why in the world they were taking so much time to do them. As I watched the team come together, I realized those offsites contributed to them becoming a highly productive team. I think those offsites were opportunities to really focus on learning about and from each person on the team, creating a strong team culture, resulting in a high performing team. There are a lot of team building exercises you can find online or in books. They might seem goofy and well some of them are, but many can really help a team build cohesiveness. These don't have to be physical or too mental or even hard. Pick team building exercises that are right for your team makeup, considering the different personalities and needs of your team members. I am afraid of heights and would do really, really bad on a high ropes course. Respecting everyone's boundaries while still providing good unifying experiences is important. One of the most important things you can do as a team leader is to build a cohesive team where people can bring their best to the team. Don't focus on making sure everyone is friends with one another, but a team culture of respect will be critical to creating a cohesive feeling.

Dealing with Conflict
When you are in any leadership position, you'll have plenty of opportunities to deal with conflict. I am adverse to conflict and dealing with conflict doesn't come naturally to me. I know some people thrive in conflict and enjoy it. I'm not going to say I enjoy it, but I definitely like helping people work through it and get to a better place. As the team leader, you need to come to terms with resolving conflict. Here are six considerations to help you deal with conflict more effectively. First, make sure you exercise a high level of tact and diplomacy. As the manager, the boss, the leader, things you say can have a much different impact than if you are someone looking in from the outside. People look to you as an example of how to treat and talk about others. They're watching how you'll deal with situations and determine whether you are someone they can confide in, someone who will support them, and someone who they can take problems to. When you try to fix problems instead of fixing people, you'll earn respect as someone who is fair and who cares about problems and people. Dealing with conflict respectfully contributes to a culture of respect. Second, work hard to reduce any personal attacks. Conflict is usually accompanied by emotions and things can quickly get out of hand. When we attack other people and not actual problems, we focus on the wrong thing. Of course, people are usually at the heart of or involved with the problem, but resolving conflict is a lot easier when you focus on actions or behavior instead of someone's personality or something that is outside of someone's control or ability to change. Personal attacks exacerbate emotions and too many emotions can make conflict resolution feel impossible. Third, make sure you're working with the right people to resolve the conflict. If there's a conflict between two people, you generally don't have to put that in front of the entire team. Keep conflict where it needs to be. Communicating issues beyond who needs to be involved will add drama where it doesn't need to be and can be a major distraction to the rest of your team. Sometimes you'll have to involve people from outside of your team, like HR or another manager, but exercise confidentiality as you work with people to grow and change. The exception to this is that if the conflict has been an issue and others on the team know about it and it is impacting others, then either once you start to resolve it or once it is resolved, you can visit the issue with your team, but do it in a way that is respectful of all parties. Fourth, go into the conflict resolution with a spirit of mentoring. You want to help people work through the conflict so they can be a stronger team or at least in a good place to make progress on projects. As the team leader, you are in a position where you should help others become better and get back into a place to contribute to the team. When you go in with a spirit of mentoring, people feel appreciated and know you care about them even if there are difficult decisions you have to make that will impact them. Fifth, it's critical to document whatever is appropriate to document. What is appropriate will depend on the situation and your organization's policies. Consult with HR or your boss to figure out what you should document. I like to document more than less. So when I go back to my documentation, I have enough context and information to know what was going on, why decisions were made, what follow up needed to happen, etc. But you need to consult with your HR team because your documentation might end up in court and you'll want to make sure you have the right documentation. Sixth, timing is everything. When you first hear about a potential problem, you can either jump right in and figure out what's going on and try to fix it or you could gather more information to determine if you even need to get involved. Many professionals you work with will handle conflict on their own without your involvement. If you get involved too early, you could cause more problems or not let what might have been naturally resolved play out. However, hoping to not get involved and neglecting your role as team leader when something really needs your involvement is probably worse. Be aware of what is going on and try to get involved at an appropriate time. Instead of cringing when conflict comes up and ignoring it and hoping it will resolve itself, you can get really good at helping people work through conflict, and amazing things could happen.

Managing Outside Influences
Outside influences can have a big impact on your team. If someone outside your team talks about changes to your project or team before you have a chance to talk about them, expect a lot of questions from your team. For example, if a customer has access to your design or QA team and tries to exert authority over your team without going through proper channels, you could see a lot of scope creep. If an executive continually talks to your team and starts to manage or suggest changes without your involvement, your team might question their future or your future or authority. Here are some considerations to help you manage outside influences. First, if you're concerned about outside influences, it's critical your team understands the chain of command and how to get accurate information. Make sure everyone knows who the supervisors are on your team and who has good and accurate information. I'm a flat organization leader, meaning if you have a supervisor between me and you, you can always come talk to me and you know I'll be as open and honest as I can. Second, remember, one of your rules is to protect your team members. I've come out of meetings where I've been the team representative and had information that was irrelevant to my team. I share what needs to be shared and leave distractions like gossip and irrelevant speculation out. For example, let's say an executive questions are direction, but by the end of our meeting, she offers her full support. I may share the journey that executive went through to show how important we are to the organization, but I might not share the early part of her journey when she didn't value what our team was doing. That information would only be a distraction to my team. Third, part of protecting your team is to keep your emotions and feelings in check. If your team sees you panic or react inappropriately, you might see similar reactions from them. Or they might lose confidence in what you are doing and look at moving to another team that seems more stable. This is not to say you can't have feelings and emotions, of course you can. But just remember you have people who are looking to you to know what to think and how to react to outside influences. I've had team leaders who shared some information that shocked me, but judging by their calm reaction, I could tell my first impression was an overreaction and it was probably no big deal. I really looked to my team leaders to get confidence from them. Fourth, there is a tendency to hear things from customers, the media, or even industry leaders that are just not true but have a negative impact on your team. Your team will look to you as the team leader for truth. Be careful with your language so you can be a source of truth and trust. People should know, they want to know, that when they come to you they're getting the truth. Fifth, if you detect confusion and turmoil coming in from the outside, spend time with those outsiders who are causing the confusion and turmoil. Work to understand what is going on and what information is actually relevant to your team. You might need to share information or resolve issues, misunderstandings or conflicts with them, and then return back to your team with accurate and timely information. Outside influences can be a real distraction and can be the reason gossip and discontent seeps into your team. Handling outside influences is largely a part of really good communication, listening to and sharing information. Make sure you do your best to not let outside influences negatively impact your team.

Managing Change
Every team I've worked on has seen change. Change can be really awesome or it can be confusing and distracting. When a competitor introduces a new product before your product is ready for market, you might see change in your specs or deadlines. When the economy is impacted by a recession, you might see changes in how people work, what they consume, or where they stop spending. Change can come from customers, your organization's executives, even other teams in your organization. Even good change can be frustrating, especially for people who are change averse. Because change is inevitable, you have an opportunity as the team leader to help your team through changes that will happen. As you learn change management skills, you will be in a stronger position as a leader and have a life skill that can help you for the rest of your life. I strongly encourage you to do a deep dive on change management. Kevin Miller and Alice Meredith, two excellent Pluralsight authors, have multiple courses on change management. Casey Ayers and Shelley Benhoff have courses on project management which talk about change management from a different perspective. I recommend diving into all of these courses because if anything will be constant in your career, it will be managing change. Here are some thoughts on helping your team through change. First, come to terms with the inevitability of change and help your team come to terms with this also. Just coming to terms with knowing that change will happen is important. They need to trust that change imposed on the team will be strategic and right, and not whimsical. Next you need to be an example of how to work through and even embrace the change that comes into your team. As you model how to react to changes, you normalize change. Not as some great disrupter that ruins everything, but as a variable to consider when working towards your objectives. If your team sees you panic or sees you react angrily to change, they will model that. They might lose confidence in you or whoever is imposing change. If they see you have a good understanding of how to act and react to change, they will have more confidence in you as a leader, the direction of your team, and their involvement and contributions. One of the things you can do to help your team navigate change well, is to focus on your team's objectives. When you focus on objectives, you can ignore some of the noise that comes from change, noise that really isn't relevant to your team or to a successful ending for your team. Now, if the changes impact your objectives, that's fine, make sure everyone understands what the impact is and what the new objectives are. Focusing on objectives is a great way to minimize the irrelevant impact of change that would otherwise be a distraction. Next, communicate appropriately. If the change is big or if the rumors are abundant, make sure you communicate well with your team so you can fight against the spread of bad information. This might mean a very clear email or meeting where you completely debunk bad information. It might mean you repeat that message multiple times. It might mean you talk to people one‑on‑one or talk to the main influencers on your team. People understand you might have a need‑to‑know information they aren't privy to, but they expect you to be as open with them as you can, and to always be honest. They deserve that from you and you owe it to them. Finally, every team leader has the responsibility to fight and advocate for their team when faced with change that should not happen. Of course, some change will come from places you can't impact, such as an economic crash or a company leader that makes massive decisions impacting the entire organization, not just your team. But some change is unreasonable and impacts your team in unforeseen ways. As team leader, determine if you should communicate with whatever powers you should to advocate for and protect your team. Perhaps people pushing the change don't understand the market opportunities or threats or the impact your team's success would have. You need to inform them so they can make the right decision and maybe undo the change they wanted to impose. Embracing change and becoming an expert in managing change will help you throughout the rest of your career. It will help you gain loyalty from your team members and confidence from your leaders. This is an excellent skill that you should really invest time into.

Building a Culture of Trust
In my teams, I strive to build a culture of trust. I want my teams to trust me, I want them to trust one another, and I want them to trust themselves. Stephen Covey's son, also named Stephen, wrote a book called "The Speed of Trust", which proposes that when there is trust, things happen quicker. When you trust your boss, you take her for her word and you don't need to understand her reasoning. When you trust a friend, you read what they recommend or buy what they suggest. Can you imagine working on a team where everyone deeply trusts everyone else? That doesn't just happen. Here are some ideas on building a culture of trust in your team. First, make sure you are trustworthy, Everyone should know, they can trust what you say. This comes from speaking the truth, being as open as you should, and even trusting yourself. These things go towards building your own integrity. Second, be consistent even through change. I find when I'm consistent to principles such as respecting others, being honest, and empowering my team, changes can come and go, but my team will still trust me and even be able to predict how I would react to something. Third, manage change wisely. Your team is watching how you handle change. Does it frustrate you and you need to vent for a day? Do you wish that customers or organizational leaders didn't ask for changes? Your team will follow your lead on this. If you don't trust customers or leaders, you invite your team to distrust customers and leaders. Fourth, celebrate everyone's wins, even if we wish they were our wins. This is one of the most important things I've learned as I've worked with other people. If I'm jealous of them or which there wins were mine. They'll catch on to that and they won't trust me. Fifth trust comes from transparency. People need to know they can ask you and their colleagues questions and get honest responses. Transparency, while respecting confidentiality, means we don't hoard information, which is a surefire way of destroying trust in a team. Sixth, own your mistakes. When you make a mistake, which I'm sure you will, genuinely admit your mistake, genuine communication builds trust while defensive positioning erodes trust. Finally, really support others on your team, especially when they make mistakes. When your team knows you trust them that you have their back, they will reciprocate that towards you and their colleagues. Building a team culture starts with you. Take ideas from my list and add your own to create a culture of trust and you should see amazing things happen on your team.

Organizational Constraints
Every team I've worked with has had constraints imposed by the organization. Usually we see this in our budget, the number of people we can hire, and the tools and resources we get access to. We might see constraints in leadership's ability to help us, especially when leaders are overextended, don't understand the technical aspects of the project, or aren't bought into the benefits. It's easy to look at organizational constraints and think they must not be sure about our project or our team. But really, every department has constraints. One of your challenges is to optimize your team's output even though you have limited resources. Here are four things you can do when working with constraints. First, do an analysis to understand what your constraints are, what the impact of those constraints are, and why you have those constraints. Every organization, team, and project has constraints. This is just normal. Understanding exactly what your constraints are will help you set realistic expectations internally and externally. Second, communicate freely about your constraints, but not in a disparaging way. Make sure you also talk about your resources and the expectations of the team. I found when teams talk freely about these things, even when there is frustration, a new conversation can start. This new conversation might sound like, "What can we do now, since we aren't getting around these constraints? Jow can we meet our expectations?" This communication goes a long way to create a culture of trust. Similarly, communicating with people outside of your team can help them understand what you're up against and why you make certain decisions. Third, with your constraints defined and communicated, you might find you need to encourage your team to come up with creative and resourceful solutions. A manager should motivate, right? This is where you get to practice your motivational skills. I've seen creativity and innovation come out of nowhere when a team has to come up with new ideas to solve problems. Fourth, don't overlook opportunities to redefine or renegotiate deadlines, budget, or scope. In the project management and change management courses on Pluralsight, you'll hear about the quality triangle with time, scope, and cost at each point of the triangle. You can try to negotiate any of those points, but make sure you are clear that changing any point can impact other points. For example, you can deliver the project faster, but it might be more expensive, have less features than the original specs, and it might not go through your QA process as thoroughly as it would if you had more time. Negotiate and communicate the trade offs and you might find your constraints are lessened. As you work within your constraints, you'll help your team understand that even though you don't get everything you want, you can still work towards your objective.

Authority, Power, and Influence
Authority, power, and influence can sometimes be interchangeable, but they each have very unique characteristics. Here's how I think about it. Imagine you're driving down the road at night and you see police lights flashing behind you. I don't know about you, but that will make my stomach turn even if I know I wasn't speeding. So you pull over and the police officers approached the car. They ask for your documents. In the U.S., that's your license and registration and then they might give you a citation and tell you to be more careful. Or if you're lucky, they might just let you off with a warning. Typically a law abiding citizen will take the citation or the ticket and drive away cautiously. The police officer has authority to pull you over and give you a citation. That authority gives them power and the power and authority give them influence. What if someone impersonating an officer pulled you over? They do not have the authority to do that and if caught would be in serious trouble. But as long as they look like an officer, they still exercise power and influence to pull you over and probably make your stomach turn. They didn't have a right to, but they had power over you especially if they played the part well. Authority and power have intrigued me for a long time. Let's shift this to our team environment. Imagine a customer asks for a change order. The question is, do they have the authority to approve it? Maybe, maybe not. Depending on the contract, our customer might have authority to make changes or the contract might stipulate changes need to be approved by someone at a higher level. If you accept a change order by someone who doesn't have the authority, the customer could challenge the change, referencing the contract. Even though our contact might not have the authority to do certain things, they could have power and influence to impact our future relationship with the customer. If our contact loves us, we might win more business. If our contact hates us, they might advocate for a different service provider when the contract expires. So there you go, authority, power, and influence. Here are some considerations every team leader should think about. First, you should understand and even define what authority, power, and influence your team has, both as a team and every individual on your team. If your team is working on a high profile project, something even the board of directors, a high profile customer, or the media might be interested in, your team might have a lot of power. This can help you in bargaining for additional resources or whatever you need for a successful delivery. You might have people on your team that have a considerable amount of influence based on their network. You might have people who can leverage their power or authority in unique ways to contribute to the success of your team. Second, once you understand where authority, power, and influence lie, consider how this plays into other decisions you make. This might change who you assign as a customer liaison or who you have make presentations to executives. If someone on your team has special credibility in your organization or in the industry, consider putting them in front of your customers. Third, identify the authority, power, and influence you need from outside your team. Who are the external leaders or sponsors that can best help guarantee the success of your team? Who are gatekeepers and others that can have a significant impact on whether your team is successful or not? There are always external people who have authority, power, and influence you could tap into. Fourth, once you identify those people, forge relationships with them so you can tap into their authority, power, and influence. You might not need it right now, but it's better to start a relationship with them now and nurture that relationship so it's ready when you most need it than to approach them when you're desperate for their help. Understanding these dynamics can help your team be more successful.

Supporting Continuous Learning
Employee motivation is a much studied and large topic. We could talk for hours about it, but I want to focus on one sliver of the topic that is relevant to this course. When talking about motivating others, there are two types of rewards. One is extrinsic, which basically means there is a cost associated, think bonus or raise. The other is intrinsic, which means there isn't a financial cost, like when your boss says thank you or that she appreciates your work. Showing appreciation is a motivating, intrinsic reward. Some studies say intrinsic rewards are more powerful than extrinsic rewards. This kind of baffles me because I'm always up for a big raise or bonus, but I have been the beneficiary of intrinsic rewards and know it changes how I feel about where I work. Continuous learning can be both intrinsic and extrinsic. An intrinsic example can be as simple as watching a short video as a team and then discussing it. Why is this a reward? Most people want to learn and grow, especially in tech. We want to feel like we're not getting stagnant. We want to have intellectual conversations and feel like our ideas are valued. When you carve out time from the normal schedule and bring people together, they can feel motivated and rewarded. An extrinsic example is to spend a few thousand dollars to send someone to a conference. I want to share four ideas of how you can use continuous learning to build the culture you want and lead your team to success. First, ask each person on your team what kind of continuous learning would be interesting to them. You might assume a developer wants training or courses on the language or technology they're working in, but there might be other skills that are bothering them and that they'd value more. Motivating your team with continuous learning will likely be more effective if each person is bought into what they're learning than if you give them something that feels irrelevant. Next, you need to be a model of continuous learning. At one company, I was in one of the leaders blocked out a significant amount of time on her calendar for her professional development. I don't know what she studied, but it was on her calendar. That showed me and the rest of us how important professional development was. When you take time to learn, or talk about what you have just read or learned, you give permission to others to talk about what they are learning next. You can explicitly recommend certain material, articles, blog posts, books, and courses. This gives them permission to spend time on their continuous education, as well as direction on what you think they should focus on. I know some team leaders have recommended certain courses I've done to their team members. Whether that was on creating better presentations or improving their listening skills. Sharing your honest feedback with your team can build a stronger professional relationship with them. Finally, have conversations around what people are learning. Whether you spend 15 minutes in a team meeting where everyone is in attendance or sponsor an optional lunch and learn, create opportunities to dive deeper into topics with one another, allowing them to share ideas, insight and experience, and teach and learn from one another, can be a really powerful learning experience. It can also be a great team building experience. The world, our careers, and industries feel like they are changing so fast. We all want to feel like we're keeping up and progressing along with those changes, providing learning opportunities can be one of the most impactful things you do as a team leader.

Summary
In this module, we talked about tactics and ideas to help you lead a successful team. We talked about creating a team culture and creating a cohesive, connected team. We talked about dealing with conflict, managing outside influences, and managing change. We talked about building a culture of trust, dealing with organizational constraints and boundaries, and authority, power, and influence. We also talked about helping your team with a continuous learning mindset. Whether you have led teams for years or you just got your first team leader assignment, I invite you to think about how the ideas from this course can help you create your team culture with intention and purpose. I'd love to hear what you're taking away from this course. Please go to the discussion area of this course and share what stuck out to you or what you'll act on. Best wishes with your team. They really are lucky to have you.